So what's the last property that we can use for our flex items?
Well, as before,
let's first get rid of our flex shrink right here and right there
and let me then add this property and the name of this property is flex basis,
this one right here.
Now what is the flex basis? The flex basis simply defines the size of an element, and now it's really
important, depending on the main axis.
So flex basis is not the width or the height,
it can basically be both which is simply dependent on the flex direction
and let me say that one more time,
that's the reason why understanding the concept of main and cross axis and how this is changed is really
crucial right here.
However at the moment, we have a flex direction of row,
so the main axis goes from left to right,
we also have defined a width.
Now with that, if I can now add a value of let's say 200 pixels to our fifth item right here,
well then if the flex basis refers to the main axis and defines the size of our element dependent on
the main axis,
well then if we reload the page, we should see that our element has a width of 296.94 pixels,
that's not equal to 300.
But keep in mind what we learned in the last lecture, we learned that the default value for flex shrink
is 1
and this basically allows our element to shrink in here.
Therefore, as we now are in a view which is kind of smaller than the initial one, as you can see it right
here, we don't have these 300 pixels. If I now increase the size,
you can see we have the 300 or if we go back right here and add back flex shrink of zero and maybe do
the same thing for the last item again, because I think it makes things a bit clearer now,
like that, then we can see if we reload the page, no matter what we do right here,
we will have 350 pixels for our last item and 300 pixels as defined by the flex basis for the fifth
item.
So that's what happens right here:
if we defined a flex basis and our flex direction is set to row, the flex basis will
overwrite this default width property. If we use the default value for flex basis which would be auto, this
one right here,
it will simply apply the width right here, as we can see, like that,
it's 350 pixels because flex basis as I said will fallback to the width value right here.
The problem is that while I'm saying it will fallback to the width value, this is only correct because
the main axis is now from left to right and therefore equal to the width.
Now let's have a look at what happens if we change the flex direction to column
and with that, we change our main axis of course which is now from top to bottom.
So if we save that,
keep in mind, we have a width defined but no height defined and the flex basis is auto,
so if we go back and reload the page, you can see that element 5,
this one right here has of course the width applied of 350 pixels as defined and the width is just as
high as we need it for the content to be displayed
but this means that if I now add a height right here like that, let's say of 200 pixels, like that
and reload the page, then you can see that our fifth item now
exactly has this height because flex basis is set to auto.
So the flex basis will fallback to the default value set for the main axis and
that's important. If the main axis goes from left to right,
this will be the width right here, if the main axis goes from top to bottom, then this will be the height.
At the same time,
this also means that if we define a value for the flex basis, let's say of 300 pixels now, like that, this
value will be applied because the fallback only comes into play if we set flex basis to auto. If we define
the flex basis, it will overwrite, as we can see right here, either the height if the main axis goes from
top to bottom or the width if the main axis goes from left to right or right to left of course
and that's actually the basic concept of flex basis.
Let's now maybe change the flex direction back to row because that's what I prefer to be honest
and I think we can keep flex basis like that, that's really fine,
as you can see, the width now is again 300 pixels and the height is 200 which we can actually also delete.
I think this looks nicer,
yes like that.
Some other important things about flex basis:
we can also use values like percentages for example,
let's say we use 10% right here. If I now reload the page, we can see that we have a width of 201
pixels but that's just the minimum value we need for the width to display the content
but if I increase the size up to here, as you can see, now the width increases,
so we have 206.19 pixels now as a width for our element
and if we inspect the flex container right here, sorry it's not really good to see,
and if we scroll down now right here to the bottom, we can see we have a width of the content, that's important
so the content of the flex container has 2062 pixels
and again, our width is 10% of that.
So 206.2,
that's just surrounding pixels of a width.
So that's also what you can apply to the flex basis.
So using percentage values for the flex basis is also possible.
Now let me summarize what we learned about the flex basis now.
The important thing is that the flex basis always refers to the main axis. If flex basis is set
to auto, the fallback will either be the width if the main axis goes from left to right or right to left
or the fallback will be the height in case the main axis goes from top to bottom or bottom to top.
That's the first thing that we have to keep in mind.
The second thing we have to keep in mind is that the flex basis property and all these properties
we saw right here can only be applied to flex items.
Therefore, we need a parent element which is a flex container and which has the display flex or inline
flex value applied.
These are the two things that we should keep in mind when working with flex basis and with the flex items
specifically.
And the last important information is that we also have a shorthand for the properties we just talked
about because instead of writing flex grow, flex shrink and flex basis, we could simply say that we write
flex, like that and then a default value for flex grow would be zero,
the default for flex shrink is 1 and the default for flex basis is auto, as we learned it. With that,
if we go back and reload the page, we can see if we need flex shrink right here by the way, like
that, as we can see now, we basically have our default behavior back that we had when we started this
second part of this module
and we also saw that we can use the properties separately or combine them in this shorthand right here.
The only problem we have right now though is that in our project, we actually do not have to use the
flex items because our project works perfectly the way it is. Therefore showing you these flex items, logic
and theory was really important because there might be situations where you have to use these flex items
but from a project perspective, we are actually done with the flexbox part and therefore, we are also
done with this module.
So let me summarize what we learned in the next lecture.